https://www.codacy.com/app/afaulconbridge/biosamples-v4?utm_source=github.com&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=EBIBioSamples/biosamples-v4&utm_campaign=badger[image:https://api.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/c2acf39bb65d4793ae3420c70ab51388[Codacy
Badge]]

[[quickstart]]
Quickstart
----------

Install Maven and JDK 8 Install docker-compose
https://docs.docker.com/compose/

MacOS: Install Docker for Mac from https://www.docker.com/docker-mac

`mvn package`

`docker-compose build`

`docker-compose up biosamples-webapps-core`

Note: this will download around 1GB of docker containers

public interface at http://localhost:8081/biosamples/beta

An example of the JSON format that can be sent by POST to
http://localhost:8081/biosamples/beta/samples is at
https://github.com/EBIBioSamples/biosamples-v4/blob/master/models/core/src/test/resources/TEST1.json

[[client-useage]]
Client useage
-------------

There is a spring client, and a spring-boot starter module, for use with
BioSamples. To use these in a maven project, add the following to the
appropriate sections:

....
<dependencies>      
    <dependency>
        <groupId>uk.ac.ebi.biosamples</groupId>
        <artifactId>biosamples-spring-boot-starter</artifactId>
        <version>4.0.4</version>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
....
....
<repositories>
    <repository>
      <id>spotnexus</id>
      <url>https://www.ebi.ac.uk/spot/nexus/repository/maven-releases/</url>
    </repository>
</repositories>
....

This can then be configured by several spring application.properties
including biosamples.client.uri to specify the base URI of the
BioSamples instance to use.

[[development-getting-started]]
Development getting started
---------------------------

To checkout and compile the code, you will need Git, Maven, and a JDK 8.
On ubuntu-based Linux distributions (16.04 or higher) you can do this
with:

`sudo apt-get install maven git default-jdk`

Then you can check out and compile the code with:

`git clone https://github.com/EBIBioSamples/biosamples-v4 biosamples`
`cd biosamples` `mvn -T 2C package`

Note: This will require a large download of Spring dependencies. Note:
This uses up to two threads per core of your machine.

At that point, you will have a local compiled version of all the
biosamples tools.

To start a copy running on the local machine (e.g. to test any changes
you have made) you can use Docker and Docker-compose.
https://docs.docker.com/compose/

You can use `docker-compose up` to start all the services, or you can
bring them up individually. See docker-compose.yml file for more
information on service names and dependencies.

To update the code you are running you will need to 
1. `git pull` the latest version
2. Recompile the java classes by running `docker-webapp.sh`

By default, the pipelines will not be run. They can be manually
triggered as follows:

[[ncbi]]
NCBI
~~~~

Download the XML dump (~400Mb) to the current directory:

`wget http://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/biosample/biosample_set.xml.gz`

Run the pipeline to send the data to the submission API via REST

`docker-compose up biosamples-pipelines-ncbi`

Note: You will need to mount the location that the XML dump was
downloaded to within the docker container. A docker-compose.override.yml
file is the easiest way to do that.

[[ena]]
ENA
~~~~
You can run the pipelines-ena to import ENA samples.
In order to do that you will need to add some security settings to maven 
to get access to oracle private driver repository.

You can read more instructions about this at https://blogs.oracle.com/dev2dev/get-oracle-jdbc-drivers-and-ucp-from-oracle-maven-repository-without-ides


[[developing]]
Developing
----------

Docker can be run from within a virtual machine e.g VirtualBox. This is
useful if it causes any problems for your machine or if you have an OS
that is not supported.

You might want to mount the virtual machines directory with the host, so
you can work in a standard IDE outside of the VM. VirtualBox supports
this.

If you ware using a virtual machine, you might also want to configure
docker-compose to start by default.

As you make changes to the code, you can recompile it via Maven with:

`mvn -T 2C package`

And to get the new packages into the docker containers you will need to
rebuild containers with:

`docker-compose build`

If needed, you can rebuild just a single container by specifying its
name e.g.

`docker-compose build biosamples-pipelines`

To start a service, using docker compose will also start and dependent
services it requires e.g.

`docker-compose up biosamples-webapp-api`

will also start solr, neo4j, mongo, and rabbitmq

To run an executable file in a docker container, and start its
dependencies first use something like:

`docker-compose run --service-ports biosamples-pipelines`

If you want to add command line arguments note that these will entirely
replace the executable in the docker-compose.yml file. So you need to do
something like:

`docker-compose run --service-ports biosamples-pipelines java -jar pipelines-4.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar --debug`

If you want to connect debugging tools to the java applications running
inside docker containers, see instructions at
http://www.jamasoftware.com/blog/monitoring-java-applications/

Note that you can bring maven and docker together into a single
commandline like:

`mvn -T 2C package && docker-compose build && docker-compose run --service-ports biosamples-pipelines`

Beware, Docker tar's and copies all the files on the filesystem from the
location of docker-compose down. If you have data files there (e.g.
downloads from ncbi, docker volumes, logs) then that process can take so
long that it makes using Docker impractical.

As docker-compose creates new volumes each time, you may fill the disk
docker is working on. To delete all docker volumes use:

`docker volume ls -q | xargs -r docker volume rm`

To delete all docker images use:

`docker images -q | xargs -r docker rmi`

NOTE: this will remove everything not just things for this project

[[mongodb-notes]]
MongoDB notes
-------------

Cross-platform easy to use mongodb management tool
http://www.mongoclient.com

[[problems-with-spring-data-rest]]
Problems with spring-data-rest
------------------------------

This was originally using spring-data-rest to expose rest API for the
repositories. But there are a number of problems with this (see below)
and that was scrapped in favor of implementing custom HATEOAS compliant
endpoints.

Content type negotiation is not possible as it can't overlap with the
URLs for the Thymeleaf controllers and it can't serve XML even with the
appropriate converters supplied.

When repeatedly sending JSON because it is a list of things with
optional components, the optional parts can become mixed if the list
ordering changes. Maybe this can be remedied by using map of attribute
types instead?

[[known-issues]]
Known issues
------------

Solr has a limit on the field size (technically the term vector).
Therefore the attribute values over 255 characters are not indexed in
solr.
